# 3. Estuarine Ecological Health

---

## [Benthic invertebrates - ARC Linkage PHE-Benthic Macro-Invertebrates.pdf](https://github.com/AquaticEcoDynamics/Peel_ARC/blob/master/Documents/3.%20Estuarine%20Ecological%20Health/Benthic%20invertebrates/ARC%20Linkage%20PHE-Benthic%20Macro-Invertebrates.pdf)

### Executive Summary
Small benthic (bottom-dwelling) invertebrates, such as worms, bivalves and shrimps, are a fundamental component of healthy aquatic ecosystems. Living on or just below the sediment, they play vital ecosystem roles such as decomposing organic matter, recycling nutrients and providing a major food source for fish and birds. They can also provide key ‘signals’ about the condition of the benthic environment, and have been used worldwide to develop biotic indices for measuring and tracking estuarine health. However, many of these indices have been developed for northern hemisphere systems, and applying them to south-western Australian estuaries has proved difficult and/or ineffective for various reasons.

This report was aimed firstly at characterising the current benthic macroinvertebrate community throughout the Peel-Harvey Estuary, and secondly at building a robust biotic index of benthic ecological health (the Benthic Community Index – BCI) and exploring its patterns across the estuary. We also explored which aspects of the benthic environment were best linked to changes in the invertebrate community and health grades (‘A’, excellent, to ‘E’, very poor) of the BCI.

Our findings show that while the current invertebrate community is species rich (72 species), it is dominated by a small number of environmentally-tolerant taxa, including various worm species (e.g. Capitella sp., Heteromastus filiformis and Prionospio cirrifera) and bivalve species (e.g. Arthritica semen and the invasive Asian date mussel Arcuatula senhousia). The community is generally representative of one in early stages of development (or ‘early succession’), which are typically found in environments that experience chronic stress. The invertebrate community showed substantially greater differences between regions of the estuary (e.g. basin vs riverine areas) than between seasons (winter vs summer) or different water depths (shallow, < 1 m vs deep, > 1m). These regional differences were strongly linked with those in bottom-water salinity, depth of oxygen penetration into the sediment, sediment odour and sedimentary microalgae (which provides food for many invertebrate taxa).

To build the BCI, a diverse suite of 16 attributes (‘metrics’) calculated from the invertebrate community were first tested for their responsiveness to an independent gradient of benthic environmental condition across the Peel-Harvey Estuary. Three metrics (species richness, diversity and dominance) showed the clearest responses, and were then used to construct an index that incorporated metric reference conditions (or benchmarks of ‘best’ metric scores) that were tailored for each broad region and season.

The BCI showed that benthic ecological health is generally better in winter (mainly good to fair, or grades B–C) than summer (mainly fair to poor, or grades C–D). These trends most likely reflected the effects of winter river flows flushing sedimentary organic matter out of the estuary, and helping oxygenate the bottom waters and sediment. This is well supported by the clear relationships that were found between increasing BCI grade and decreasing trends in sedimentary organic matter and mud content and increasing oxygen penetration and odour score. From a spatial perspective, benthic ecological health was often poorest (poor to very poor, or grades D–E) in the deeper waters of the upper Murray River, the deeper sections of the basins (especially in summer) and in the shallow south-eastern area of Peel Inlet (including in the deeper navigational channels near the entrance of the Murray River). In some cases, the sediment was completely lacking in invertebrate fauna. These areas coincide with some of the most highly enriched (nutrients and organic matter) and muddy sediments and, in the case of the south-eastern Peel, areas of high macroalgal growth. These findings have significant implications for the ongoing benthic health of the estuary, given the forecast trends of less freshwater flushing of the estuary under a drying climate, and the proposed expansion of marina developments and boating channels within the Peel-Harvey Estuary.

Finally, we have proposed a benthic invertebrate monitoring plan to enable the ecological health of the Peel-Harvey to be reliably tracked into the future, and provide further decision support for management intervention.

---

## [Fish - ARC Linkage PHE-Fish ecology.pdf](https://github.com/AquaticEcoDynamics/Peel_ARC/blob/master/Documents/3.%20Estuarine%20Ecological%20Health/Fish/ARC%20Linkage%20PHE-Fish%20ecology.pdf)

### Executive Summary
Fish communities provide important ‘signals’ about the ecosystem health of estuaries. Their component species typically occupy habitats from the top to bottom of the water column, feed across most levels of estuarine food webs, and encompass varied behavioral traits and estuarine use patterns. Taking a community-wide view can thus reveal many clues about the cumulative and complex impacts of the estuarine environment on higher ecological health. As a result, biotic indices that integrate key traits of fish communities, scored against established ‘benchmark’ or reference conditions, have been used to measure, monitor and report the ecological health of estuaries worldwide.

This study focused on applying a Fish Community Index (FCI) to the Peel-Harvey Estuary to measure and track its ecological health over a 40-year period from 1978 to 2018. It also aimed to link patterns in the FCI to key environmental drivers to support forecasting of ecological health under different environmental scenarios.

The FCI, which was developed specifically for south-western Australian estuaries, synthesises complex information from different structural and functional metrics of the fish community into simple ‘report card’ grades (A, very good, to E, very poor). The long historical fish community data set that exists for the Peel-Harvey was supplemented by two further years of fish sampling in the current study (2016-2018), which covered a greater spatial range in both the shallow (<1.5 m deep) and deeper waters (>1.5 m deep) than had ever been sampled previously. While this 40 year data set provides a rare basis for setting metric benchmark conditions (especially in the shallow basins where most historical data was collected), inconsistencies in sampling methods over time, gaps in the data record, and a relative lack of data in the deeper waters and rivers, has hampered some interpretations of longer-term health. Moving forward, we have proposed a consistent fish monitoring regime for the Peel-Harvey to enable its ecological health to be reliably tracked with the FCI into the future.

Based on the available evidence, our findings show that there has been a slight improvement in the health of the shallow river environments from 1978-2018, from poor (grade D) to fair (grade C), while the shallow basin waters have remained in fair health. The condition of the deeper waters, however, and especially in the basins, has declined from a good health status (grade B) to a fair/poor status (C/D). The improvements in the shallow rivers mainly reflect an increased dominance of small hardyhead species that are specialist feeders and can spawn in the estuary, rather than the opportunistic or detritus-feeding species that previously dominated these areas. The more obvious decline in the deeper basins, however, reflected a clear shift in the fish fauna from one that was relatively species-rich, abundant and contained more benthic-associated and/or estuarine individuals (all of which positively influence the FCI, e.g. Estuary cobbler, Mulloway, Yellow-finned whiting and Western striped grunter), to one that is more depauperate (with no fish being caught on several sampling occasions), sporadic and dominated by marine species (traits which negatively influence the FCI, e,g. Tailor, Southern eagle rays, Herring and Weeping toadfish). The opening of the Dawesville Cut in the mid-1990s, combined with a drying climate, has clearly led to a ‘marinisation’ of the fish fauna. However, the above declines in ecological health may also reflect (i) declines in the health of the benthic invertebrate fauna upon which many of these species feed, (ii) decreases in green macroalgal growths (especially in Peel Inlet) which can provide abundant fish food and shelter, (iii) increased water clarity and thus net avoidance and/or (iv) fishing pressure impacts on targeted species.

More detailed analysis of the current (2016–2018) FCI trends showed that, overall, the estuary is in fair to poor health (grades C–D). At a finer regional and seasonal resolution, trends in the shallow nearshore waters were often inconsistent, possibly reflecting that large areas of the basins are extremely shallow and prone to rapid environmental changes, and are dominated by small, highly-schooling species which can lead to variable catches. One worrying trend that was consistent in the shallows, however, was the often poor to very poor health (grade D–E) in the Mandurah Entrance Channel. This reflected a far lower number of species since the 1970s/80s, as well as clear drops in abundance of various specialist feeding, estuarine-spawning and/or bottom-dwelling species (e.g. Long-finned goby, Bridled goby and Small-toothed flounder), and increases in the relative proportions of opportunistic species such as Weeping toadfish.

Trends in the deeper waters were generally more discernible, and indicated that (i) the health of the basins is generally better than in the rivers (and especially in the Murray River); (ii) the more tidally-flushed basin regions (northern Harvey Estuary, western Peel Inlet and, to a lesser extent, eastern Peel Inlet) are often in better health (good to fair, grades B–C) than the poorly flushed southern Harvey (fair to poor, grades C–D), and (iii) the upper Murray River appears to be in chronically poor ecological condition (grade D), characterised in most seasons by only two or three species which are either detritivores or opportunistic omnivores (Sea mullet, Perth Herring or Black Bream). The population status of the latter species, which is prized by recreational fishers, is also vulnerable due to poor recruitment of juveniles and low abundances of adults above minimum legal length at capture. These trends most likely reflect the susceptibility of the upper Murray to salinity stratification of the water column, high organic matter loading, and the persistent low dissolved oxygen levels that develop as a result.

Finally, when FCI scores were statistically correlated with a suite of environmental variables, bottom water age, dissolved oxygen content and salinity were shown to have the greatest influence on ecological condition. In the deeper waters of the rivers, the best ecological condition occurred when dissolved oxygen content was highest and when the bottom water age was between 50 and 100 days. Poor FCI scores in this region occurred shortly after flooding (very low water age) and when bottom water became stagnant (water age >100 days). In the shallow waters of the rivers increasing salinity had a weak positive effect on FCI scores, while in the shallow waters of the basins, hypoxia area (% of region with dissolved oxygen content < 2 mg/L) had a weak negative influence. These quantitative responses of the FCI to specific environmental variables provides a basis for predicting the future ecological condition of the system under various environmental scenarios.

---

## [Macrophytes - ARC Linkage PHE-Macrophytes.pdf](https://github.com/AquaticEcoDynamics/Peel_ARC/blob/master/Documents/3.%20Estuarine%20Ecological%20Health/Macrophytes/ARC%20Linkage%20PHE-Macrophytes.pdf)

### Executive Summary
Seagrass and macroalgal communities (‘macrophytes’) play key roles in the function of estuaries and the societal benefits they provide. Over more recent history, the macrophytes of the Peel-Harvey, and especially the green macroalgae, have been a major focus due to the massive blooms that occurred from the 1960s–1980s and the ecological and societal issues that resulted. Opening of the Dawesville Cut in 1994 to help alleviate these problems led to a major step change in the estuary’s hydrology and nutrient levels. There have also been other more gradual shifts in the estuarine environment from catchment development and climate change effects, particularly in recent decades.

This report explores how the macrophyte community in the Peel-Harvey has changed over the last 40 years (1978–2018), and the environmental drivers that have been most influential. While other studies have examined changes in these plant communities in particular periods (e.g. just before and after the Cut), this is the first to examine the full sampling record. We also developed an index of macrophyte community condition or ‘health’, which was translated into a report card scale from ‘A’ (excellent) to ‘E’ (very poor), and used it to track changes over time across the estuary. Lastly, we propose a macrophyte monitoring plan for the future. This report provides a broad summary of our key findings, and is supplemented by a more detailed and technical account in Krumholz (2019).

Our findings show there have been dramatic changes in the macrophyte community from the late 1970s, which in most regions of the estuary has reflected major declines in green macroalgae and increases in seagrass. These shifts were most obvious just after the Cut and the subsequent boost in tidal flushing. The most recent survey results (2017–2018) show that, for the first time in the monitoring record, the community is clearly dominated by seagrass (70% of overall biomass in autumn 2018) as opposed to green macroalgae (52–86% of overall biomass from 1978–1994). This progression has led to improved health of the macrophyte community, from very poor to fair (index grade E–C) across much of the estuary in 1985–1989, to fair to excellent (grade C–A) in 2018.

One region of the estuary that is not showing signs of improvement is the southern Harvey Estuary. The macrophytes in this shallow and poorly flushed region remain in poor condition and are showing worrying signs with respect to increases in nuisance green macroalgae. While average green algal biomass decreased from the late 1970s to just after the Cut in this region, it has increased in more recent years, especially in spring when it far exceeds values recorded for any other macrophyte group across the whole estuary in the full 40 year timeframe. The shallow south-eastern Peel Inlet also has a high biomass of green macroalgae, again especially in spring, which has largely persisted throughout the monitoring record and even increased in recent years.

The main environmental driver of the above longer-term shifts in the macrophyte community was the concentration of total nitrogen in the water column. Green algal-dominated assemblages were generally linked with higher nitrogen concentrations, and more seagrass-dominated assemblages were linked with lower concentrations. Some weaker correlations were also found with increasing salinities and temperatures, as well as decreasing total phosphorus concentrations.

A more detailed study of the macrophytes across the estuary in spring 2017 and autumn 2018 found 23 species in total (over a third of which were red macroalgae), which has increased from the last comparable survey in 2009 (14 species in spring 2009 vs 18 species in spring 2017). Based on biomass, seagrass clearly dominates the 2017–2018 community (56% on average), most of which is Ruppia sp. and occurs mainly in the northern Harvey Estuary and parts of Peel Inlet. Not only has the seagrass contribution increased since spring 2009 (38% vs 60% in spring 2017), but the dominant seagrass species has changed from Zostera sp. to Ruppia sp. As for the long-term macrophyte data, the changes in the 2017–2018 community from more seagrass-dominated assemblages in the northern half of the system to a more green algal-dominated one in the southern Harvey Estuary, were best linked with an increase in total nitrogen, and to a lesser extent total phosphorus.

To better assess the ongoing health and environmental drivers of this macrophyte community, and if its recent move towards seagrass domination reflects a stable shift, it is imperative that a consistent and regular macrophyte monitoring program is implemented, alongside other environmental monitoring of the estuary. The broad monitoring regime we have proposed can be tailored to suit resourcing.
